adds core to cloud guide part 2 (#5232)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/core-to-cloud-3.md

---
title: 'Move from dbt Core to dbt Cloud: Optimization tips'
id: core-to-cloud-3
description: "Use this guide to learn how to optimize your dbt Cloud experience and get answers to common questions."

> hoverSnippet: "se this guide to learn how to optimize your dbt Cloud experience and get answers to common questions."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hoverSnippet: "Use this guide to learn how to optimize your dbt Cloud experience and get answers to common questions."
```

icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
tags: ['Migration','dbt Core','dbt Cloud']
keywords: ['dbt Core','dbt Cloud','Migration', 'Move dbt', 'Migrate dbt']
level: 'Intermediate'
recently_updated: true
---

## Introduction

Moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud streamlines analytics engineering workflows by allowing teams to develop, test, deploy, and explore data products using a single, fully managed platform.

Explore our 3-part-guide series on moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud. The series is ideal for users aiming for streamlined workflows and enhanced analytics:

import CoretoCloudTable from '/snippets/_core-to-cloud-guide-table.md';

<CoretoCloudTable/>

## What you'll learn

> If you're reading this guide, you may have already started your move to dbt Cloud and are looking for tips to help you optimize your dbt Cloud experience, including tips and caveats for the following areas:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have already started your move to dbt Cloud and are looking for tips to help you optimize your dbt Cloud experience. This guide includes tips and caveats for the following areas:
```

### Tips
- Manage [dbt versions](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud) and ensure team synchronization with dbt Cloud's one-click feature, eliminating the hassle of manual updates and version discrepancies.
- dbt Cloud supports a whole host of [cloud providers](/docs/cloud/connect-data-platform/about-connections), including Snowflake, Databricks, BigQuery, Fabric, and Redshift (to name a few).
- Use [Extended Attributes](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments#extended-attributes) to set a flexible [profiles.yml](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml) snippet in your dbt Cloud Environment settings. It gives you more control over environments (both deployment and development) and extends how dbt Cloud connects to the data platform within a given environment.
  - For example, if you have a field in your `profiles.yml` that you’d like to add to the dbt Cloud adapter user interface, you can use Extended Attributes to set it.

### Caveats
- Not all parameters are available for adapters.

> - One project can only use one warehouse type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A project can only use one warehouse type.
```

## Development tools

dbt Cloud empowers data practitioners to develop in the tool of their choice. It ships with a [dbt Cloud CLI](/docs/cloud/cloud-cli-installation) (local) or [dbt Cloud IDE](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud) (browser-based) to build, test, run, and version control your dbt projects.

> Both development tools are tailored to suit different roles and preferences within your team. To streamline your team’s workflow, it's important to know who is likely to prefer the dbt Cloud IDE and who might lean towards the dbt Cloud CLI. This section is a little different to the others and aims to clarify these preferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both development tools are tailored to suit different audiences and preferences within your team. To streamline your team’s workflow, it's important to know who will prefer the dbt Cloud IDE and who might lean towards the dbt Cloud CLI. This section aims to clarify these preferences.
```

> ### dbt Cloud IDE

Author: @jtcohen6 i've taken your feedback for the dev tools breakdown and  rather than have a general 'tips and caveats' breakdown, i tried to explain which tools would be best for what user since it's a bit more nuanced and depends on the user.

> A web-based interface for building, testing, running, and version-controlling dbt projects. It compiles dbt code into SQL and executes it directly on your database.

Author: ```suggestion
A web-based interface for building, testing, running, and version-controlling dbt projects. It compiles dbt code into SQL and executes it directly on your database. The dbt Cloud IDE makes developing fast and easy for new and seasoned data practitioners to build and test changes.
```

> A single web-based interface for building, testing, running, and version-controlling dbt projects. It compiles dbt code into SQL and executes it directly on your database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A web-based interface for building, testing, running, and version-controlling dbt projects. It compiles dbt code into SQL and executes it directly on your database.
```

**Who might prefer the dbt Cloud IDE?**

- New dbt users or those transitioning from other tools who appreciate a more guided experience through a browser-based interface.

> - Team members focused on development speed and convenience, including analysts and less technical stakeholders.

Author: ```suggestion
- Team members focused on development speed and convenience.
```

> - Team members focused on development speed and convenience.

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestions
- Team members focused on speed and convenience for getting started with a new or existing project.
```

> - Team members focused on development speed and convenience, including analysts and less technical stakeholders.

Reviewer: A lot of the language here makes the IDE seem like the ideal tool for the new user or junior roles, but some advanced users are going to enjoy using it as well and we should be mindful of that. We might want to call them out in a positive way so they don't feel like using the IDE is somehow making them less than a senior analyst.

"Makes it fast and easy for the most advanced analytics engineers to build and test changes" or something like that.

- Individuals who prioritize direct feedback from the IDE, such as seeing unsaved changes.

**Key features**

> - The dbt Cloud IDE has a simplified Git functionality:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The dbt Cloud IDE has simplified Git functionality:
```

  - Create feature branches from the branch configured in the development environment.
  - View saved but not-committed code changes directly in the IDE.
- [Format or lint](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/lint-format) your code with `sqlfluff` or `sqlfmt`. This includes support for adding your custom linting rules.
- Allows users to natively [defer to production](/docs/cloud/about-cloud-develop-defer#defer-in-dbt-cloud-cli) metadata directly in their development workflows, reducing the number of objects.

> - Support running multiple dbt commands at the same time through [safe parallel execution](/reference/dbt-commands#parallel-execution), a [feature](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features) available in dbt Cloud's infrastructure. In contrast, `dbt-core` *doesn't support* safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for running multiple dbt commands at the same time through [safe parallel execution](/reference/dbt-commands#parallel-execution), a [feature](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features) _only_ available in dbt Cloud. 
```

> The dbt Cloud IDE provides a simplified interface that's accessible to all users, regardless of their technical background. However, there are some capabilities that are intentionally not available in the dbt Cloud IDE due to its focus on simplicity and audience:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Cloud IDE provides a simplified interface that's accessible to all users, regardless of their technical background. However, there are some capabilities that are intentionally not available in the dbt Cloud IDE due to its focus on simplicity and ease of use:
```

- Pre-commit for automated checks before *committing* code is not available (yet).
- Mass-generating files / interacting with the file system are not available.

> - Combining/piping commands, such as `dbt run -s (bash command)` is not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Combining/piping commands, such as `dbt run -s (bash command)`, is not available.
```

### dbt Cloud CLI

> The dbt Cloud CLI allows you to run dbt commands against your dbt Cloud development environment from your local command line. For users who seek full control over their development environment and ideal for those comfortable with the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Cloud CLI allows you to run dbt [commands](/reference/dbt-commands#available-commands) against your dbt Cloud development environment from your local command line. For users who seek full control over their development environment and ideal for those comfortable with the command line.
```

**Who might prefer the dbt Cloud CLI?**

> - Experienced dbt users and developers looking for granular control over their Git workflows.

Reviewer: We're saying that this gives them "full" or "granular" control, so it could be useful to have a section that lists what they can accomplish with the CLI that they can't in the IDE. The key features below seem to be almost the same as the IDE section.

Reviewer 2: This would include all the things that are listed above as not possible with the IDE:
```
- Pre-commit for automated checks before *committing* code is not available (yet).
- Mass-generating files / interacting with the file system are not available.
- Combining/piping commands, such as `dbt run -s (bash command)`, is not available.
```

- Data engineers and practitioners who need to perform complex operations, like mass file generation or specific command combinations.

**Key features**

- Allows users to run dbt commands against their dbt Cloud development environment from their local command line with minimal configuration.
- Allows users to natively [defer to production](/docs/cloud/about-cloud-develop-defer#defer-in-dbt-cloud-cli) metadata directly in their development workflows, reducing the number of objects.
- Support running multiple dbt commands at the same time through [safe parallel execution](/reference/dbt-commands#parallel-execution), a [feature](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features) available in dbt Cloud's infrastructure. In contrast, `dbt-core` *doesn't support* safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process.
- Able to use Visual Studio (VS) Code extensions (such as [dbt-power-user](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=innoverio.vscode-dbt-power-user) to enhance the development experience by adding extra functionalities.

## Orchestration

> dbt Cloud provides a robust orchestration that enables users to schedule, run, and monitor dbt jobs with ease. Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Cloud's orchestration features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt Cloud provides robust orchestration that enables you to schedule, run, and monitor dbt jobs with ease. Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Cloud's orchestration features:
```

### Tips

- Enable [partial parsing](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments#partial-parsing) between jobs in dbt Cloud to significantly speed up project parsing by only processing changed files, optimizing performance for large projects.
- [Run multiple CI/CD](/docs/deploy/continuous-integration) jobs at the same time which will not block production runs. The Job scheduler automatically cancels stale runs  when a newer commit is pushed. This is because each PR will run in its own schema.

> - dbt Cloud automatically cancels a scheduled run if the existing run is still executing. This prevents unnecessary, duplicative executions.

Reviewer: This is more of a notification than a tip. Since it's automatic, does the user need to do any configuration or can we suggest an action for them to make this even more effective?

Author: they don't but i thought it'd be helpful to know how it works in cloud. they do need to know that api jobs aren't covered so I'll link to the section.

> - dbt Cloud automatically cancels a scheduled run if the existing run is still executing. This prevents unnecessary, duplicative executions.

Author: ```suggestion
- dbt Cloud automatically [cancels](/docs/deploy/job-scheduler#run-cancellation-for-over-scheduled-jobs) a scheduled run if the existing run is still executing. This prevents unnecessary, duplicative executions.
```

- Protect you and your data freshness from third-party outages by enabling dbt Cloud’s [Git repository caching](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments#git-repository-caching), which keeps a cache of the project's Git repository. <Lifecycle status="enterprise"/>
- [Link deploy jobs](/docs/deploy/deploy-jobs#trigger-on-job-completion--) across dbt Cloud projects by configuring your job or using the [Create Job API](/dbt-cloud/api-v2#/operations/Create%20Job) to do this. <Lifecycle status="team,enterprise"/>
- [Rerun your jobs](/docs/deploy/retry-jobs) from the start or the point of failure if your dbt job run completed with a status of **`Error.`**

> ### Caveats

Reviewer: The items below seem more like they belong in the tips section of the doc. Caveats should serve as a warning of limitations.

Author: they're actually more caveats for the scheduler so happy to leave it here!

- To automate the setup and configuration of your dbt Cloud platform, you can store your job configurations as code within a repository:
  - Check out our [Terraform provider.](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/dbt-labs/dbtcloud/latest/docs/resources/job)
  - Alternatively, check out our [jobs-as-code](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-jobs-as-code) repository, which is a tool built to handle dbt Cloud jobs as a well-defined YAML file.
- dbt Cloud users and external emails can receive notifications if a job fails, succeeds, or is cancelled. To get notifications for warnings, you can create a [webhook subscription](/guides/zapier-slack) and post to Slack.

> ## dbt Mesh

Reviewer: This guide is labeled as `intermediate`, but isn't mesh more of an advanced workflow? I don't think we need to change the status of the doc, but as this is a "Getting Started" guide, maybe we should call out in the text that this is a more advanced feature?

Author: got it, was trying to keep it brief since it links to the docs. i would focus more on mesh being a use case for organizations that are experiencing slow models being built, governance requirements are increasing, teams are working in diff workflows. so the data architecture is helpful for orgs with more mature, complex transformation workflows in dbt. i can add that.

Author: ok changed to:

[dbt Mesh](/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-1-intro) helps organizations with mature, complex transformation workflows in dbt increase the flexibility and performance of their dbt projects. It deploys multiple interconnected dbt projects instead of a single large, monolithic project.

It enables you to integrate and navigate between different projects and models with [cross-project dependencies](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), enhancing collaboration and data governance.

Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Mesh:

Use [dbt Mesh](/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-1-intro) to seamlessly integrate and navigate between different projects and models with [cross-project dependencies](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), enhancing collaboration and data governance. Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Mesh:

### Tips
- To use [cross-project references](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), all developers need to develop with dbt Cloud (either with the dbt Cloud CLI or dbt Cloud IDE). Cross-project references are not supported in dbt Core.
- Link models across projects for a modular and scalable approach for your project and teams.
- Manage access to your dbt models both within and across projects using:

>   - **[Groups](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#groups)** - Organize nodes in your dbt DAG that share a logical connection and assign an owner to the entire group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **[Groups](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#groups)** &mdash; Organize nodes in your dbt DAG that share a logical connection and assign an owner to the entire group.
```

>   - **[Access](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#access-modifiers)** - Control who can reference models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **[Model Access](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#access-modifiers)** &mdash; Control who can reference models.
```

>   - **[Model Versions](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-versions)** - Enable adoption and deprecation of models as they evolve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **[Model Versions](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-versions)** &mdash; Enable adoption and deprecation of models as they evolve.
```

>   - **[Model Contracts](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts)** -Set clear expectations on the shape of the data to ensure data changes upstream of dbt or within a project's logic don't break downstream consumers' data products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **[Model Contracts](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts)** &mdash; Set clear expectations on the shape of the data to ensure data changes upstream of dbt or within a project's logic don't break downstream consumers' data products.
```

- Use [exports](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/exports) to write commonly used queries directly within your data platform, on a schedule.

### Caveats
- dbt Semantic Layer currently supports the Deployment environment for querying. Development querying experience coming soon.
- Run queries/semantic layer commands in the dbt Cloud CLI, however running queries/semantic layer commands in the dbt Cloud IDE isn’t supported *yet.*
- dbt Semantic Layer doesn't yet support SSH tunneling for [Postgres or Redshift](/docs/cloud/connect-data-platform/connect-redshift-postgresql-alloydb) connections. It also doesn't support using [Single sign-on (SSO)](/docs/cloud/manage-access/sso-overview) for Semantic Layer [production credentials](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/service-tokens#permissions-for-service-account-tokens), however, SSO is supported for development user accounts.

## dbt Explorer

[dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) enhances your ability to discover and understand your data models through rich metadata and lineage visualization. Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Explorer:

### Tips

> - Improve documentation accessibility, making it easier for teams to find and understand the data assets available to them.

Reviewer: This is an excellent feature callout, but for this to be a tip we should mention how they would do this (or link to the docs)

Author: removed per next comment

> - Use the search and filter capabilities in dbt Explorer to quickly locate models, sources, and tests, streamlining your workflow.

Reviewer: This is my favorite Explorer feature - maybe we can remove the tip above and make this the first (or combine them)

- View all the [different projects](/docs/collaborate/explore-multiple-projects) and public models in the account, where the public models are defined, and how they are used to gain a better understanding of your cross-project resources.

> - Use the [Lenses](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#lenses) feature, which are like a map layers for your DAG, available from your project's lineage graph. Lenses help you further understand your project’s contextual metadata at scale, especially to distinguish a particular model or a subset of models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the [Lenses](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#lenses) feature, which are map-like layers for your DAG, available from your project's lineage graph. Lenses help you further understand your project’s contextual metadata at scale, especially to distinguish a particular model or a subset of models.
```

- Access column-level lineage (CLL) for the resources in your dbt project. <Lifecycle status="enterprise"/>

### Caveats

> - There has been at least one successful job run in the production deployment environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There must be at least one successful job run in the production deployment environment for Explorer to populate information. 
```

> - Familiarize yourself with dbt Explorer’s features to fully leverage its capabilities to avoid missed opportunities for efficiency gains.

Reviewer: This isn't really a caveat but a suggestion. It's ok to not have multiple caveats if there really is only one. You could potentially make this a closing thought instead.

> - Familiarize yourself with dbt Explorer’s features to fully leverage its capabilities to avoid missed opportunities for efficiency gains.

Author: ```suggestion

Familiarize yourself with dbt Explorer’s features to fully leverage its capabilities to avoid missed opportunities for efficiency gains.
```

## What's next?

<ConfettiTrigger>

Congratulations on making it through the guide 🎉!

> We hope you’re equipped with useful insights and tips to help you with your move. Something to note is that moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud isn’t just about evolving your data projects — it's about exploring new levels of collaboration, governance, efficiency, and innovation within your team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you’re equipped with useful insights and tips to help you with your move. Something to note is that moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud isn’t just about evolving your data projects, it's about exploring new levels of collaboration, governance, efficiency, and innovation within your team.
```

> For the next steps, you can continue exploring our 3-part-guide series on moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the next steps, continue exploring our 3-part-guide series on moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud:
```

<CoretoCloudTable/>

</ConfettiTrigger>

### Resources

> If you need any additional help or have some questions, you can reach out to us in the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need any additional help or have some questions, use the following resources:
```

- Use [exports](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/exports) to write commonly used queries directly within your data platform, on a schedule.

### Caveats
- dbt Semantic Layer currently supports the Deployment environment for querying. Development querying experience coming soon.
- Run queries/semantic layer commands in the dbt Cloud CLI, however running queries/semantic layer commands in the dbt Cloud IDE isn’t supported *yet.*
- dbt Semantic Layer doesn't yet support SSH tunneling for [Postgres or Redshift](/docs/cloud/connect-data-platform/connect-redshift-postgresql-alloydb) connections. It also doesn't support using [Single sign-on (SSO)](/docs/cloud/manage-access/sso-overview) for Semantic Layer [production credentials](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/service-tokens#permissions-for-service-account-tokens), however, SSO is supported for development user accounts.

## dbt Explorer

[dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) enhances your ability to discover and understand your data models through rich metadata and lineage visualization. Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Explorer:

### Tips

> - Improve documentation accessibility, making it easier for teams to find and understand the data assets available to them.

Author: ```suggestion
```

description: "Use this guide to learn how to optimize your dbt Cloud experience and get answers to common questions."
hoverSnippet: "Use this guide to learn how to optimize your dbt Cloud experience and get answers to common questions."
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
tags: ['Migration','dbt Core','dbt Cloud']
keywords: ['dbt Core','dbt Cloud','Migration', 'Move dbt', 'Migrate dbt']
level: 'Intermediate'
recently_updated: true
---

## Introduction

Moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud streamlines analytics engineering workflows by allowing teams to develop, test, deploy, and explore data products using a single, fully managed platform.

Explore our 3-part-guide series on moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud. The series is ideal for users aiming for streamlined workflows and enhanced analytics:

import CoretoCloudTable from '/snippets/_core-to-cloud-guide-table.md';

<CoretoCloudTable/>

## What you'll learn
You may have already started your move to dbt Cloud and are looking for tips to help you optimize your dbt Cloud experience. This guide includes tips and caveats for the following areas:

- [Adapters and connections](https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/core-to-cloud-3?step=3) 

> - [Development tools](https://docs.getdbt.com)/guides/core-to-cloud-3?step=4) 

Author: ```suggestion
- [Development tools](https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/core-to-cloud-3?step=4) 
```

  - Check out our [Terraform provider.](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/dbt-labs/dbtcloud/latest/docs/resources/job)
  - Alternatively, check out our [jobs-as-code](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-jobs-as-code) repository, which is a tool built to handle dbt Cloud jobs as a well-defined YAML file.
- dbt Cloud users and external emails can receive notifications if a job fails, succeeds, or is cancelled. To get notifications for warnings, you can create a [webhook subscription](/guides/zapier-slack) and post to Slack.

## dbt Mesh

[dbt Mesh](/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-1-intro) helps organizations with mature, complex transformation workflows in dbt increase the flexibility and performance of their dbt projects. It deploys multiple interconnected dbt projects instead of a single large, monolithic project.

It enables you to integrate and navigate between different projects and models with [cross-project dependencies](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), enhancing collaboration and data governance.

Here are some tips and caveats to consider when using dbt Mesh:

### Tips

> - To use [cross-project references](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), all developers need to develop with dbt Cloud (either with the dbt Cloud CLI or dbt Cloud IDE). Cross-project references are not supported in dbt Core.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To dynamically resolve [cross-project references](/docs/collaborate/govern/project-dependencies#how-to-write-cross-project-ref), all developers need to develop with dbt Cloud (either with the dbt Cloud CLI or dbt Cloud IDE). Cross-project references aren't natively supported in dbt Core, except by installing the source code from upstream projects [as packages](/docs/build/packages#how-do-i-add-a-package-to-my-project)
```

- Link models across projects for a modular and scalable approach for your project and teams.
- Manage access to your dbt models both within and across projects using:
  - **[Groups](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#groups)** &mdash; Organize nodes in your dbt DAG that share a logical connection and assign an owner to the entire group.

>   - **[Model Access](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#access-modifiers)** &mdash; Control who can reference models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **[Model access](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access#access-modifiers)** &mdash; Control which other models or projects can reference this model.
```

  - **[Model Versions](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-versions)** &mdash; Enable adoption and deprecation of models as they evolve.
  - **[Model Contracts](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts)** &mdash; Set clear expectations on the shape of the data to ensure data changes upstream of dbt or within a project's logic don't break downstream consumers' data products.

> - Use [dbt-meshify](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-meshify) to separate your mono-repo and move to dbt Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use [dbt-meshify](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-meshify) to accelerate splitting apart your monolith into multiple projects.
```

### Caveat

> - Currently, dbt Mesh does not support circular project dependencies.

Author: @jtcohen6 i think you mentioned you had some more bits to add here for mesh?

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 Here are the top three I would list. Probably too much text, so feel free to cut it down.

### Caveats

**Use of cross-project references requires that each upstream dbt project maps to exactly one dbt Cloud project.** We strongly discourage defining multiple projects for the same codebase, whether for the purposes of managing permissions, data warehouse connections, and isolation of production from non-production data. While this was required historically, this should no longer be necessary with the rollout of Staging environments (beta, link), Environment-level RBAC (coming soon), and Extended Attributes (link).

**Project dependencies are uni-directional.** dbt will check for cycles across projects and raise errors if any are detected. We are considering support for bi-directional project dependencies in the future, whereby dbt would still check for node-level cycles while allowing cycles at the project level.

**Public model metadata is visible to everyone in the account.** The goal is to improve discoverability of data products. This is different from access to the underlying data, which is managed by permissions in the data warehouse. For use cases where even metadata about a reusable data asset is sensitive, we are considering an optional extension of `protected` models (https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/9340).

For more questions, see the FAQs on dbt Mesh: https://docs.getdbt.com/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-4-faqs

  - For example, if you have a field in your `profiles.yml` that you’d like to add to the dbt Cloud adapter user interface, you can use Extended Attributes to set it.

### Caveats
- Not all parameters are available for adapters.
- A project can only use one warehouse type.

## Development tools

dbt Cloud empowers data practitioners to develop in the tool of their choice. It ships with a [dbt Cloud CLI](/docs/cloud/cloud-cli-installation) (local) or [dbt Cloud IDE](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud) (browser-based) to build, test, run, and version control your dbt projects.

Both development tools are tailored to suit different audiences and preferences within your team. To streamline your team’s workflow, it's important to know who will prefer the dbt Cloud IDE and who might lean towards the dbt Cloud CLI. This section aims to clarify these preferences.

> 

Author: @jtcohen6 quick one - based on [this thread](https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C012TTNN0JK/p1712760453549829), should we also add info about the gitignore file as described [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/collaborate/git/version-control-basics#the-gitignore-file)

> Make sure you check the .gitignore file contains the necessary entries. dbt Core doesn't interact with git so dbt Cloud doesn't automatically add or verify entries in the .gitignore file. Additionally, if the repository already contains dbt code and doesn't require initialization, dbt Cloud won't add any missing entries to the .gitignore file.

- Support running multiple dbt commands at the same time through [safe parallel execution](/reference/dbt-commands#parallel-execution), a [feature](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features) available in dbt Cloud's infrastructure. In contrast, `dbt-core` *doesn't support* safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process.

The dbt Cloud IDE provides a simplified interface that's accessible to all users, regardless of their technical background. However, there are some capabilities that are intentionally not available in the dbt Cloud IDE due to its focus on simplicity and ease of use:

- Pre-commit for automated checks before *committing* code is not available (yet).
- Mass-generating files / interacting with the file system are not available.
- Combining/piping commands, such as `dbt run -s (bash command)`, is not available.

### dbt Cloud CLI
The dbt Cloud CLI allows you to run dbt [commands](/reference/dbt-commands#available-commands) against your dbt Cloud development environment from your local command line. For users who seek full control over their development environment and ideal for those comfortable with the command line.

> **Who might prefer the dbt Cloud CLI?**

Author: added this here @jtcohen6

Author: When moving from dbt Core to dbt Cloud, make sure you check the `.gitignore` file contains the [necessary folders](/docs/collaborate/git/version-control-basics#the-gitignore-file). dbt Core doesn't interact with git so dbt Cloud doesn't automatically add or verify entries in the `.gitignore` file. Additionally, if the repository already contains dbt code and doesn't require initialization, dbt Cloud won't add any missing entries to the `.gitignore file`.
